Nearly all programming languages have the ability to change the value of a variable in C++.
We can change the value stored in a variable using the assignment operator the assignment operator is
a single equal sign.
It's important to understand that this does not represent equality in the code sample on this page.
We are not asserting that the left hand side is equal to the right hand side.
Nor are we comparing the left hand side and the right hand side.
In this case we're evaluating the value of the expression on the right hand side and storing that value
into the variable represented by the left hand side.
C++ is statically typed.
That means that the compiler will be checking to see if it makes sense to store the value from the right
hand side to the left hand side.
If it does it make sense you'll get a compiler error saying exactly that in order to store value into
the left hand side the left hand side must be assignable.
It can't be literal.
It can't be a constant if it is the compiler will produce an error message.
We can assign multiple variables all at once in a single assignment statement.
This is possible because the assignment expression evaluates to what was just assigned.
So it's easy to chain assignment statements together.
Let's head over to the ID and will work with the assignment operator in live code.
Ok so now I'm in the code like ID.
I'm in the Section 8 workspace and the project is called assignment operator.
We'll go through some examples of how to use the assignment operator and the effects of the assignment
operator in this video.
So what I've done here is I've created two variables number one and number two I'm declaring them and
initializing them to 10 and 20 respectively.
And then I've just got a simple output statement that prints out number one and number two.
Right now this is not assignment right.
What you see appear right now and let me just mark that up what you see here is not assignment.
It's initialization.
It's important to understand the difference.
Initialization happens when the variable is declared and it gets that value for the very first time
assignment is when you change a value that already exists in the variable.
Ok so let's try to change one of those values.
I'm going to type in here just something really simple like no one equals 100.
You notice I just said number one equals 100.
This is one of the ways that programmers read this.
Number one equals 100.
Assign 100 to number 1.
Move 100 to one.
You'll hear this sort of jargon but often you'll hear no one equals 100.
And what we mean there is it's an assignment statement we're not saying that someone is actually equivalent
to 100.
This is an assignment statement.
No one in this case has 10 remember.
So what we're doing is we're moving a hundred into that value.
OK so let's break this down and go through this one step at a time so you really see what's going on
here what we're doing is.
Again we have a left hand side of an assignment operator and the right hand side right.
That's an assignment expression.
We put a semi-colon in the end now it's an assignment statement.
In this case we're evaluating the right hand side expression.
In this case it's 100.
It's a literal.
It's going to evaluate to 100.
Now here is my variable number one Currently it has a 10 in there.
You can see that right there I initialized it to 10.
When we say something like no one equals 100.
Or again assign 100 to 1.
We're evaluating that right hand side in this case as I said it's 100 and we're storing that hundred
into number one.
But no one is 10.
Yes but when you use Number one this variable number one on the left hand side we're using it's location
not its value in C++ there's the concept of l value and R value and it gets pretty complicated when
we're talking about more advanced features in C++ but at this level it's really pretty simple.
The R-value is the contents of a variable bullet say.
In this case the contents of number 1 is 10 so the R-value of Number One will be 10.
The value is the location of that variable.
So again what this means is move 100 or store 100 into the location of number one.
So what's going to happen is that we just change the 10 to 100 k again.
Conceptually it's a pretty straightforward thing.
So let me clear this will run it and what we expect now is we expect no one to be 100.
And number two to still be 20 because we haven't messed with it at all.
Let me compile and run and you can see no one is 100.
Because we change an assignment statement and number two is 20.
OK.
It's pretty simple.
We don't have to use literals here we can use anything we like in this case I could say no to.
OK.
So remember because this variable number two is on the right hand side of that assignment statement
we're using it's our value or its value or its contents we're using the 20 basically.
So we're taking the 20 and we're assigning it to the location where number one is that box where someone
lives.
So it's going to change that got to 20 ok.
Or we'll put a 20 in number one however you want to look at it all means the same thing.
So now when we print these two values we should get 20 and 20.
So let's give it a run.
So I'm building and running and now we've got 20 and 20 Remember we've got a left hand side.
The assignment operator and the right hand side followed by a semicolon.
This right hand side could be really really complex.
I mean it could be some really you know it could be some really complex mathematical expression that
just goes on and on and on and on.
Does it really matter what the compiler is going to do it's going to evaluate this expression to some
value.
And then it's going to assign that value it was just calculated into that variable.
The compiler does type checking for us remember C++ is statically typed which means that a lot of errors
are caught by the compiler.
This is very different from other languages like Python and Ruby and so forth where they do all this
type checking at runtime.
C++ does it at compile time.
So when the program is running you're guaranteed that this is going to be correct because it's already
done a lot of this checking for you.
So what the compiler does now is it's going to check to see does it make sense for me to assign whatever
value is in here to here.
How does it know it's looking at the types it's saying.
Number two is an integer number one is an integer.
OK if I did something like number one equals 200 it's going to say OK that's an integer does it make
sense to assign an integer integer to an integer.
Sure it does.
It's got its rules internally and we'll talk about mixed mode assignment in mixed mode math in a couple
of videos from now.
That's where we're adding and multiplying integers and real numbers and assigning potentially a real
number to an integer.
It's not just it's within it's right we've got different types going working together and that all works
really well too.
But we'll talk about that in a couple of videos so that takes care of this.
Hopefully you can see that conceptually it's really really straightforward.
Let's say that we wanted to change these together.
OK so what we can do here is we can change those.
Those assignment operators together and again let's break this down so you can see what's happening.
We're going to say it no one to and some value could be a big old mathematical expression.
But in this case I'm just going to use a thousand to make things easier.
OK so we've got two assignment operators here.
What's important to understand with assignment operators and excessive expressions is that they return
a value themselves.
They returned what was just assigned.
And they associate right to left which makes sense right.
In other words this will be the last thing done.
So the first thing the compiler does is it sees this expression right here and it says OK I want to
assign a thousand to number two.
OK let's do that.
So numb to right here is going to get a thousand.
Now the value of that discretion evaluates to is a thousand because that's the number that was just
assigned.
So now you've got number one equals a thousand.
So what we do is we assign a thousand to number one
OK.
And now we're done.
So you could see that you can chain these things together and they go right to left.
It's a handy way to initialize a bunch of variables to the same value.
Again we can have all sorts of expressions in here and so forth if we want.
That's really not considered good practice.
The only time that you really should even consider changing these assignment operators is when you're
assigning the same thing to everything.
Like number one number two and three and four equals 10 or zero or something like that.
That makes sense but if you've got really complicated expressions in this and these pieces here that's
probably not a good idea to do.
OK so let's take a look at that and let's run this.
And you can see now that when they print out you get a thousand and the thousand just like you would
expect.
No one is a thousand to two a thousand.
OK let's do an error here.
Let's say we wanted to do something like that.
Now the C++ compiler is pretty smart.
And when we talk about classes and objects we'll talk about how we can make the assignment operator
our own so it works with our own classes as the senator said C++ is pretty smart.
It's going to try to see if it's possible to convert whatever's on the right hand side to the left hand
side.
In this case you're telling the compiler store a string Frank.
Write a sequence of characters into an integer that makes no sense.
The compiler is going to try to see if it can convert that string to an integer somehow and if it's
got some sort of code that maybe you've written it will execute that code and convert it.
In this case there is no such code.
So if I build and run this I'm going to get an air and the air is going to say Invalid conversion from
a character pointer.
We'll talk about what that is and a few videos to an integer.
So again it's a conversion issue it's saying I don't know this is these are apples and oranges as far
as the compiler is concerned.
So let me clear this and let's do one more let's say I want to assign 100 to number one.
We've seen that works fine.
But what if no one is a constant.
So let's say we made no one to contest this shouldn't be allowed right because you've just said I've
got a constant integer here number one and I initialized it to 10.
And now you want to change it to 100.
Obviously the compiler is going to say well wait a minute you just told me that was a constant I can't
do that for you.
So let's try that.
We'll run it and you should see an error.
Something about read only.
There you go.
Error assignment of read only variables not allowed.
So you can't do that.
And similarly I can't do something like this.
One hundred say equals 1 right.
What are you trying to do here.
Your compiler is probably thinking what in the world do they want to do.
It's OK we know what no one is right.
It's value it's 10 because it's on the right hand side.
But now you want to assign it to 100 to 100 is a literal 100 doesn't have an l value it doesn't have
a location in memory.
So when you run this you'll see something like Error l value required as the left operand of an assignment.
I need to store this somewhere and either location and 100 is a literal.
Does it have a location.
OK so that's it.
Assignment at this level is pretty simple.
We're going to use it at this level for a bit.
Once we get to our own classes and objects we can make assignment work for us in a really really powerful
way and we'll talk about that when we get there in the next video what we'll do is we'll talk about
the mathematical operators or the arithmetic operators plus the minus the multiply the divide and the
remainder.